LONG RANGE JUMP SHOT

Accuracy

Left Right alignment - is created by linning up the entire right side of the upper body with
the basket. It starts from the right hip, and goes through the right shoulder to the right
arm and hands.

Depth Alignment - is much harder, and requires a lot of practice and a really good sense of
exactly where the rim is. Always have a good look at the basket as you shoot.

Arc - if left right alighnment is fairly accurate having more arc will cause the ball to dip
faster on its way down and will increase the likelihood of it going through the hoop.

Backspin - backspin causes the ball to cut through wind better as there aren't consistent grooves
for wind to alter the path of the ball. This doesn't matter as much indoors. Back spin also
causes the ball to bounce softer when it hits the rim. This is the same concept as a drop shot
in tennis.

Arm and Hands - the arm and hands are the last to guide the ball before it is released and
thus is most responsible for accuracy. Even if the body is shifting or not lined up exactly
the arm and hands can make adjustments. Ideally a player keeps his off hand on the ball as
long as possible, until the wrist of the shooting hand starts its flicking motion. Also during
the flicking of the ball a player should curl his fingers to maximize contact with the ball
as it leaves the hand. The ball should roll off the finger tips. When you look at a player's
follow through if his fingers are stright then the ball probably didn't roll off his finger
tips.

Middle Finger - I believe the middle finger release is the best release, simply because the
middle finger is the longest finger, it allows you to be in contact with the ball slightly
longer. I believe a player has to turn a lot to comfortably release with the middle finger.
If a player doesn't turn as much, its easy to release off the index finger or split the release
between the index and middle fingers.

Concentrated Reps - The brain collects statistical information as we put up shots. Reinforce
this information by looking at how a shot is missed and try to correct errors with mechanics.
Shoot with concentration on correct form and mechanics. Once proper form and mechanics become
second nature, most of a player's concentration will be torwards gaging the distance. And sometimes
can envision the entire trajectory of the ball as he is shooting.
