LONG RANGE JUMP SHOT

Mechanics

From bottom up from the perspective of a right handed shooter.

Lower body:

Feet are apart with the right foot slightly forward and both feet pointing slightly left. A
common alternative is both feet pointing towards the basket and two feet are lined up. There
is a range of how wide of a stance jump shooters employ. Anywhere from a few inches apart to
shoulder width apart are all common. I personally think a narrower stance is better. I feel
like you jump a little quicker and with a little more power when employing a narrower stance.
People with bowed legs (many athletes have slightly bowed legs) will probably employ a slightly
wider stance, just because their natural standing and walking stance is a bit wider.

Players typically go into the jump of their jump shot with a quick hop or two steps. The quick
hop is typically followed by a quicker jump that uses minimal bending of the knees and mainly
uses the calves. Players that step into their shot typically steps into a deeper knee bend and
jump using the quads a bit more. Players will use either, but the hop is a lot more popular and
is generally accepted as the superior way to get into your jump shot. Both ways apply to both
catch and shoot as well as pulling up off the dribble. During the hop both feet do not have
to leave the ground and land simultaneously, it can be a very quick 1-2.

After a player is in the air, as he releases the ball he will also bring the two legs and feet
close together and land in an extremely narrow stance.

Whole body:

Going into the jump of the jump shot, the ball should start from a low position, typically
from below waist level. If a ball is caught higher on a catch and shoot, the ball is first
brought lower (this is called dipping the ball). Dipping the ball should be in sync with the
body dipping in preparation for the jump.

As a player begins to jump they should simultaneous set the ball. After a player is airborn,
release the ball by pushing it and flicking it torwards the basket.

Make sure to not set the ball too early, and have the ball moving upwards torwards the setpoint
and not already set as you are experiencing the most explosive part of your jump off the ground.

When jumping make sure to not lengthen and tighen the mid section (hips, abdomine, and rest
of core). Keep it relaxe. This will happen naturally if the jump is using mainly calves and
knees bend minimally and quads are used only slightly. Otherwise one has to concentrate and
activate their core to accomplish this. Jumping is a motion which naturally lengthens and
tightens the body including the core. The release is also a motion that lengthens and tightens
the core, specifically its a motion that will lengthen the right side of the core. However
we don't jump and release at the same time. And the most efficient shot will leave the top
two thirds of the body relaxed during the jump and lengthen them during the release.

While holding the ball its natural to be somewhat squared up to the basket. However the release
is a one handed motion and that is best executed from a turned position. In order to accomplish
this players can start slightly turned or squared up but turn in the air either before or almost
simultaneous to the release.

Alignment for a jump shot starts at the right hip, and goes through the right shoulder and
through the right arm. Point all of these torwards the basket as one release the ball.

When you release the ball and your arms extend from your upper torso at the shoulder a physical
law called "conservation of momentum" will cause the upper body to be rocked back and our entire
body will rotate causing the feet to swing forward. Some 'experts' out there call this the
'sweep and sway'. I personally see this as something that occurs naturally when a player shoots
a jump shot properly. It is not a deliberate motion. Also its best to keep the entire body
straight, do not flex at the hip, do this by activating your core.

The release:

Player should hold the ball with their fingers spread as wide as possible. This causes the
ball to rest on the fingers of the shooting hand and slightly off the palm.

I like palming the ball with fingers as much as possible, fingers are slightly bent like the
conturs of the ball and all finger prints are on the ball.

I like to keep the wrist of my off hand flexed slightly and my off arm elbow slightly elevated.

The off hand comes off the ball before the wrist flicks, and remain above the head and is in
a position like a karate chop.

Extend the arm all the way as well as flick the wrist as far as it comfortably goes in one
smooth motion. Fingers should remain curled for maximum contact with the ball during release.
The ball comes off the finger tips. As a result if you hold the follow through fingers should
not be straight.

I like to use the thumb and pinky as more 'holders' and flick with the middle three fingers.
However other variants exist where the flick is mainly done by the index finger, index and
middle, or all fingers other than the thumb.

The release should be high, quick, with both shoulders extended upwards close to the ear and
both hands should remain above your head after release.

Even though player extends arm to the fullest, try not to explosively lock the elbow. And even
though player flicks quickly and to the fullest, try not to snap the wrist. Perform these actions
in as smooth a motion as possible. Motions that lock or snap joints diminish accuracy. Also
try not to explosively extend your arm, this will cause your arm to immediately recoil after
you release the ball. This might diminish accuracy, or at least make the amount of force applied
less consistent. And don't over extend the shooting shoulder. Players might do this as they
are releasing the ball in search of more power. But this motion contorts the whole body as
well as causes the off hand to drop quickly.

As the release occurs, the body should be turned left to almost point towards the sideline.
However the head remain straight and facing up to the basket.

The right shoulder is not overextended which can cause the off arm to drop quicker and head
to tilt to the left.

The head is tilted up slightly torwards the basket.

During the release the eyes are on the basket. The arm, especially forearm and hand, should
invade the vision of the rim since they will be lined up with the basket. After the release
look at the ball to check the arc and backspin.
