LONG RANGE JUMP SHOT

Power

Here power is not raw power, its the amount of power we can add to the shot without diminishing
accuracy. Try to add power from bigger muscles, like the shoulder, triceps, and the rest of
the body. Keep the motion of the forearm and hand as effortless and smooth as possible to maximize
accuracy.

For most amateur basketball players that play in the play ground jump shots within 15 feet
of the basket are quite effortless. Players rise up and effortlessly release the ball and guide
it torwards the basket. Somewhere between 15 feet and 20 feet is where most players start losing
accuracy in an attempt to add more power to their shot. One can not simply push and flick the
ball harder torwards the basket, or jump harder, without serious loss in accuracy.

Mechanics change a bit from long range, and jump shot mechanics are completely different from
the set shot mechanics (free throw mechanics).

When shooting from long range, 20+ feet, I find there are two different ways to shoot representing
two different efficiency local maxima. The first is how the vast majority of amateurs shoot
the long ball. Players set the ball as they dip their body in preparation for the jump and
release the ball as they jump. This is actually highly efficient. Both jumping and releasing
the ball are motions that lengthens the body, in particular they both lengthen the core of
the body, it makes complete sense to execute them at the same time. Also by releasing as we
jump power from the jump is very efficiently transfered into propulsion of the ball. Vast majority
of amateurs while learning to play basketball naturally find this shooting technique. Its biggest
drawback is that the release point, and thus the first part of the trajectory torwards the
basket is low, making it easier for defenders to block.

Most pros do not shoot long range jump shots like amateurs. They first elevate and release
in mid air. While pros generally possess more upper body strength, its not this upper body
strength that enables them to have an arial release from long range. The arial release is still
a full body motion. There are various techniques to draw power from the body leading to an
effortless release while shooting from long range.

The basketball is not that heavy, and a small amount of extra power can go a long way.

Sources of power from bottom up from the perspective of a right handed shooter:

The Hop - take a small hop into the jumpshot. The hop leads to a quicker jump as you are fighting
less inertia compared to jumping from a more still position. The hop gives a small buildup
into your jump. This hop will make a player's jump more effortless which indirectly leads to
a more comfortable release from further out.

Jump Forward - jumping slightly forward adds overall power to your shot as you are bringing
the ball closer to the basket as well as putting more forward momentum on the ball, however
you are also bringing it closer to the defender. Make sure to jump straight up such that your
body is still perpendicular to the ground, and not leaned forward. This is typically the case
if you are already experiencing some forward momentum before you jump and jump straight up.
I don't think you lose accuracy jumping forward slightly so utilize this depending on the situation.
When you are jumping slightly forward your release will cause your body to rotate in a way
such that your feet will land even further forward relative to rest of your body. In other
words its a more exaggerated 'sweep and sway'.

Land Narrow - no matter how wide or narrow your feet are as you become airborn and are about
to release bring your legs and feet together as you release the ball. This motion elevates
the center of gravity of your entire body ever so slightly and thus adds upward force to the
release.

Quick Release - Self explanatory

(Above are more minor sources of power, below are what I consider bigger sources of power)

Setting the Ball - set the ball from a low position, and also set the ball as you push off
the ground. As you swing the ball to the set point you capture a lot of upward momentum in
the ball as well as your arms. If you set the ball as you jump you should be ready to release
after you are set withoiut much delay. If you set the ball from a low position with some momentum,
the ensuing release will capture some of that momentum adding power to your release. Try to
have hands positioned properly before setting the ball begins.

Lower Set Point - Set the ball lower and further back (closer to your head). The lower and
further back the ball is set, the more room there is to exert force on the ball during the
release. My set point has the ball almost touching my right forehead. My right upper arm is
almost horizontal with me sticking my elbow forward as much as possible. My head is leaned
back slightly to make extra room to set the ball.

Activate the Core - jumping is a motion that lengthens the body. To separate it from the release
we don't want to jump with so much force such that the core of our bodies also lengthens. We
want to keep the natural amount of compression in that region, so it can lengthen during the
release. The easiest way to do this is to jump with minimal knee bend and mainly employee the
calves and feet. This will not give you the most elevation but will lead to a much more powerful
release. If you jump with a deep knee bend and make heavy use of your quads, its easy to go
overboard and stretch out the core. Reguardless of how a player jumps they can activate their
core muscles during the jump to keep their mid section stable. If the core is not stretched
out during the jump, it will naturally stretch (especially the right side) during the release.
While one's center of gravity is not affected by this lengthening, it gives the upper body
more upward momentum at the expense of the lower body. Its like the upper body is pushing against
the lower body for additional power. This affect seems small, but it makes quite a difference.
Also activating the core makes the boday straight throughout the jumpshot, you generate more
power from your shoulder when you extend it from a mass that's not going to contort, because
contortion either in the core or in the hips will obsorb some of the force exerted at the
shoulder between the arm and the body.

The Turn - often a player will naturally have his body squared up to the basket. However the
release is a one handed motion and is best executed with the body turned to the left side.
A player gets the furthest and most comfortable extention of the shooting arm from a turned
position. But if a player is still turning the body (initiated at the hip) as he releases the
ball, the turn can also add additional power to the release, even a slight turn, for example
a 30 degree turn (from 30 degree to 60 degree angle between body and backboard). The turn propels
the entire right arm torwards the basket. Also if a player goes straight up with the ball and
arms in front of him, his upper torso should already be in a slight fade. From this position
turning to the left will also naturally elevate the right hip relative to the left. This also
adds slight upward momentum to the entire right arm.

Also once a player has separated the jump from the release he has the ability to choose when
to release the ball once its set and he is airborn. The earlier the release the more upward
momentum from the jump is captured at expense of height of release point. Typically from long
range players will always release the ball somewhere during the upward portion of their jump.
A player can use his discretion based on defense.

Notice that even though the release is airborn, many sources of power still come from the lower
body and mid section. I used to believe that an airborn release is mainly an upperbody motion
and that we add power by pushing and flicking the ball with more force. Now I believe the release
should always remain effortless for accuracy. Adding too much power in the arms and hands for
a more powerful release will result in huge losses in accuracy.
